% goxdr(1)
% David Mazi&egrave;res
%

# NAME

goxdr - Go XDR compiler

# SYNOPSIS

goxdr [-b] [-o _output.go_] [-i _import_] [-p _package_] [_file.x_ ...]

# DESCRIPTION

goxdr compiles an RFC4506 XDR interface file to a set of go data
structures that can be either marshaled to or unmarshaled from
standard XDR binary format or traversed for other purposes such as
pretty-printing.  It does not rely on go's reflection facilities, and
so can be used to special-case handling of different XDR typedefs that
represent identical go types.

goxdr-compiled XDR types map to the most intuitive go equivalent:
strings map to strings, pointers map to pointers, fixed-size arrays
map to arrays, and variable-length arrays map to slices, without new
type declarations that might complicate assignment.  E.g., the XDR
`typedef string mystring<32>` is just a string, and so can be assigned
from a string.  This does mean you can assign a string longer than 32
bytes, but length limits are rigorously enforced during both
marshaling and unmarshaling.

## Type representations

To be consistent with go's symbol export policy, all types, enum
constants, and struct/union fields defined in an XDR file are
capitalized in the corresponding go representation.  Base XDR types
are mapped to their equivalent go types as follows (note that `T`
cannot be `opaque` or `string` in this table):

    XDR type        Go type       notes
    --------------  ---------     ------------------------------
    bool            bool          use capital TRUE and FALSE
    int             int32
    unsigned int    uint32
    hyper           int64
    unsigned hyper  uint64
    float           float32
    double          float64
    quadruple       float128      but float128 is not defined
    string<n>       string
    opaque<n>       []byte
    opaque[n]       [n]byte
    enum T          type T int32
    T*              *T            for any XDR type T
    T<n>            []T           for any XDR type T
    T[n]            [n]T          for any XDR type T

Each XDR `typedef` is compiled to a go type alias (`type Alias =
Original`).

Each XDR `enum` declaration compiles to a defined type whose
representation is an `int32`.  The constants of the enum are defined
as go constants of the new defined type.

XDR defines bools as equivalent to an `enum` with name identifiers
`TRUE` and `FALSE`.  goxdr translates XDR's `bool` to go's native
`bool` type.  However, XDR still requires you to use capital `TRUE`
and `FALSE`.  (The identifiers `true` and `false` will get translated
to exported go identifiers `True` and `False`, which is probably not
what you want.)

An XDR `struct` is compiled to a defined type represented as a go
struct containing each field of the XDR struct.

An XDR `union` is compiled to a data structure with one public field
for the discriminant and one method for each non-void "arm
declaration" (i.e., declaration in a case statement) that returns a
pointer to a value of the appropriate type.  There is no need to
initialize the union when setting the discriminant; changing its value
just causes the appropriate method to return a non-nil pointer.
Invoking the wrong method for the current discriminant value calls
panic.

As an example, the following XDR:

~~~~{.c}
enum myenum {
    tag1 = 1,
    tag2 = 2,
    tag3 = 3
};

union myunion switch (myenum discriminant) {
    case tag1:
        int one;
    case tag2:
        string two<>;
    default:
        void;
};
~~~~

compiles to this go code:

~~~~{.go}
type Myenum int32
const (
    Tag1 Myenum = 1
    Tag2 Myenum = 2
    Tag3 Myenum = 3
)
func XDR_Myenum(x XDR, name string, v *Myenum) {...}

type Myunion struct {
    Discriminant Myenum
    ...
}
func (u *Myunion) One() *int32 {...}
func (u *Myunion) Two() *string {...}
func XDR_Myunion(x XDR, name string, v *Myunion) {...}
~~~~

## Convenience methods

XDR `enum` types have a method `XdrEnumNames() map[int32]string` that
returns a mapping from numeric values to the names assigned to those
values.

XDR `union` types have an `XdrValid() bool` method that returns
whether the discriminant is in a valid state.  For `union` types that
are not valid by default, because go's default 0 value does not
correspond to a valid discriminant, a method `XdrInitialize()` places
them in a valid state.  Similarly, `enum` types that can't be
statically verified to be valid with value 0 (either because no name
is assigned to constant 0, or because names are assigned to constants
in a different file), have an `XdrInitialize()` method that sets them
to the first name in the `enum` definition.

## The XDR interface

For every type `T` generated by goxdr (where `T` is the capitalized go
type), including typedefs, goxdr generates a function

~~~~{.go}
func XDR_T(x XDR, name string, v *T) {...}
~~~~
that can be used to marshal, unmarshal, or otherwise traverse the data
structure.  The `name` argument has no effect for RFC4506-compliant
binary marshaling, and can safely be supplied as the empty string
`""`.  However, when traversing an XDR type for other purposes such as
pretty-printing, `name` will be set to the nested name of the field
(with components separated by period).

The argument `x` implements the XDR interface and determines what
XDR_T actually does (i.e., marshal or unmarshal).  It has the
following interface:

~~~~{.go}
type XdrType interface {
	XdrValue() interface{}
	XdrPointer() interface{}
}

type XDR interface {
	Marshal(name string, val XdrType)
	Sprintf(string, ...interface{}) string
}
~~~~

`Sprintf` is expected to be a copy of `fmt.Sprintf`.  However, XDR
back-ends that do not make use of the `name` argument (notably
marshaling to RFC4506 binary format) can save some overhead by
returning an empty string.  Hence, the following are the two sensible
implementations of `Sprintf`:

~~~~{.go}
func (xp *MyXDR1) Sprintf(f string, args ...interface{}) string {
	return fmt.Sprintf(f, args...)
}

func (xp *MyXDR2) Sprintf(f string, args ...interface{}) string {
	return ""
}
~~~~

`Marshal` is the method that actually does whatever work will be
applied to the data structure.  The second argument, `val`, will be
the go value that must be marshaled/unmarshaled.  To simplify data
structure traversal, the value is not always just a pointer to the
value to be marshaled---in some cases the value is cast to or wrapped
in a defined type that allows handling of many different types to be
collapsed together.  Specifically, here is the type of `val` depending
on what is being marshaled:

* For bool and all 32-bit numeric types (including the size of
  variable-length arrays), `val` is passed as a pointer implementing
  `XdrNum32`, which allows the value to be extracted and set as a
  `uint32`.

* For all 64-bit numeric types, `val` is passed as a pointer
  implementing `XdrNum64`, which allows the value to be extracted and
  set as a `uint64`.

* For `struct` and `union` types, `val` is just a pointer to the type
  being marshaled.  However, these types implement the `XdrAggregate`
  interface, which allows the `Marshal` method of `XDR` to call the
  `XdrMarshal(x XDR, name string)` method on `val` to recurse through
  all fields of `val`.

* `enum` types are also passed as a simple pointer to the underlying
  field, but `enum` types implement `XdrNum32` instead of
  `XdrAggregate`.

* Fixed-length arrays (other than `opaque[]`) are passed to `Marshal`
  one element at a time, so `Marshal` is never called on the whole
  array (or on a pointer to the whole array).

* Variable-length arrays (other than `opaque<>`) are passed first as a
  pointer to a defined type implementing the `XdrVec` and
  `XdrAggregate` interfaces.  If `Marshal` calls the `XdrMarshal`
  function (as for a `struct` or `union`), it recurses, first calling
  `Marshal` on a value of `XdrSize`, then on each element of the
  vector.

* Similar to variable-length arrays, pointers use a defined type that
  implements the `XdrPtr` and `XdrAggregate` interfaces.  When
  recursing, `Marshal` is called first on another defined type that
  implements the `XdrNum32` interface (capable of containing the value
  0 or 1 to indicate nil or value-present), then, if the pointer is
  non-nil, it calls `Marshal` on the underlying value.

* `string` is passed as an `XdrString`, which also encodes the size
  bound of the string and implements the `XdrVarBytes` and `XdrBytes`
  interfaces.

* `opaque<>` is passed as an `XdrVecOpaque` structure, which also
  implements the `XdrVarBytes` and `XdrBytes` interfaces.

* `opaque[]` is passed as an `XdrArrayOpaque` (user-defined slice type
  pointing to the entire array).  This type implements `XdrBytes` but
  not `XdrVarBytes`.

For most types, the original type or a pointer to it can be retrieved
via the `XdrPointer()` and `XdrValue()` methods, which return an
`interface{}`.  Two exceptions are `XdrArrayOpaque` (for which
`XdrValue()` returns a slice and `XdrPointer` returns `nil`), and the
fake `bool` on which `Marshal` is called for a pointer type (which
bool supports `XdrValue()`, but returns `nil` from `XdrPointer()`).

The table below summarizes the (overlapping) interfaces implemented by
types passed to `Marshal` functions, where `T` stands for a complete
standalone XDR type (so not `string` or `opaque`).  Basic marshaling
can be performed in a type switch statement handling interfaces that
cover all types, for instance `XdrNum32`, `XdrNum64`, `XdrBytes`, and
`XdrAggregate`.

    Interface    Implemented for underlying types
    -----------  ---------------------------------------
    XdrNum32     bool, [unsigned] int, enums, float,
                 size, pointer present flag
    XdrNum64     [unsigned] hyper, double
    XdrVec       T<n>
    XdrPtr       T*
    XdrVarBytes  string<n>, opaque<n>
    XdrBytes     string<n>, opaque[n], opaque<n>
    XdrAggregate struct T, union T, T*, T<n>
    Stringer     all types in XdrNum{32,64} and XdrBytes
    Scanner      all types in XdrNum{32,64} and XdrBytes
    XdrType      all XDR types

## XDR functions

As previously mentioned, each (capitalized) type `T` output by goxdr
also has function `XDR_T`.  For types that are instances of
`XdrAggregate` (e.g., `struct` and `union` types), this function is a
simple wrapper around the `Marshal` method:

~~~~{.go}
func XDR_T(x XDR, name string, v *T) {
    x.Marshal(name, v)
}
~~~~

For other types, however, this generated function casts `v` to a more
convenient alternate type implementing the interfaces described in the
previous subsection.  As an example, the following function in the
pre-defined boilerplate casts an ordinary `*int32` into the defined
type `*XdrInt32`, which implements the `XdrNum32` interface:

~~~~{.go}
func XDR_int32(x XDR, name string, v *int32) {
        x.Marshal(name, (*XdrInt32)(v))
}
~~~~

The following table lists the concrete types passed to the `Marshal`
method.  Note that types listed as `generated` get passed as a
different defined type for each underlying type `T`.  The defined type
makes the size bound availble via an `XdrBound()` method, since that
information cannot conveniently be encoded as part of the go type.

    XDR type        Marshaled as    notes
    --------------  --------------  --------------------------
    bool            *XdrBool
    int             *XdrInt32
    unsigned int    *XdrUint32
    float           *XdrFloat32
    hyper           *XdrInt64
    unsigned hyper  *XdrUint64
    double          *XdrFloat64
    string<n>       XdrString
    opaque<n>       XdrVecOpaque
    opaque[n]       XdrArrayOpaque
    T               *T              for struct, enum, union
    T[n]            n times *T
    T*              generated
    T<n>            generated
    size            *XdrSize        when recursing in T<n>



Note that while an XDR `Marshal` method can use a type switch to
special-case certain types, this approach does not work for
`typedefs`, which goxdr emits as type aliases rather than defined
types---i.e. "`type Alias = Original`" rather than "`type Alias
Original`".  However, the `XDR_Alias` function for such a typedef
checks for a method called `x.Marshal_Alias(x XDR, name string, v
*Alias)` and calls it instead of `x.Marshal` if it exists, allowing
code to differentiate type aliases.

XDR functions panic with type `XdrError` (a user-defined string) if
the input is invalid or a value is out of range.

## Pre-defined XDR types

The predefined types `XdrOut`, `XdrIn`, and `XdrPrint` implement the
`XDR` interface and perform RFC4506 binary marshaling, RFC4506 binary
unmarshaling, and pretty-printing, respectively.

~~~~{.go}
type XdrOut struct {
	Out io.Writer
}
type XdrIn struct {
	In io.Reader
}
type XdrPrint struct {
	Out io.Writer
}
~~~~

# OPTIONS

goxdr supports the following options:

`-help`
:	Print a brief usage message.

`-b`
:	goxdr outputs boilerplate code to assist in marshaling and
unmarshaling values, including code for interfaces such as `XDR` and
`XdrNum32` as well as helper types implementing these interfaces, such
as `XdrInt32`.  Only one copy of this boilerplate should be included
in a package.  If you use goxdr to compile all XDR input files to a
single go file (the recommended usage), then you will get only one
copy of the boilerplate.  However, if you compile different XDR files
into different go files, you will need to specify `-b` with each XDR
input file to avoid including the boilerplate, then run goxdr with no
input files (`goxdr -o goxdr_boilerplate.go`) to get one copy of the
boilerplate.  You should also use this option if you are importing
another package that already includes the boilerplate using the `-i`
option below.

`-enum-comments`
:	When an enum has one or more constants annotated with a comment,
this options causes goxdr to emit a method `XdrEnumComments()
map[int32]string` that contains the comment turned into a string.  The
option is useful if, for instance, you have an enum encoding various
error conditions.  In that case you can put a human-readable
description of the error condition as a comment in the XDR source
file, and access the text of that comment from your program.

`-i` _import_path_
:	Add the directive <tt>import . "_path_"</tt> at the top of the
output file.  This is needed when XDR files in the current package
require XDR structures defined in a different package, since XDR
itself provides no way to specify package scoping.  Note that when
importing generated XDR from another package, you will want to use the
`-b` flag to avoid duplicating the boilerplate code.

`-o` _output.go_
:	Write the output to file _output.go_ instead of standard output.

`-p` _package_
:	Specify the package name to use for the generated code.  The
default is for the generated code to declare `package main`.

# EXAMPLES

To serialize a data structure of type `MyType`:

~~~~{.go}
func serialize_Mytype(val *MyType) []byte {
	buf := &bytes.Buffer{}
	XDR_MyType(&XdrOut{ buf }, "", val)
	return buf.Bytes()
}
~~~~

To serialize/unserialize an arbitrary instance of `XdrAggregate` (any
struct or union, but not simpler types such as integers and strings):

~~~~{.go}
func serialize(val XdrAggregate) []byte {
	buf := &bytes.Buffer{}
	val.XdrMarshal(&XdrOut{ buf }, "")
	return buf.Bytes()
}

func deserialize(val XdrAggregate, in []byte) (e error) {
	defer func() {
		switch i := recover().(type) {
		case nil:
		case XdrError:
			e = i
		default:
			panic(i)
		}
	}()
	val.XdrMarshal(&XdrIn{ bytes.NewBuffer(in) }, "")
	return nil
}
~~~~

To pretty-print an arbitrary XDR-defined data structure, but
special-case any fields of type `MySpecialStruct` by formatting them
with a function called `MySpecialString(*MySpecialStruct)`, you can do
the following:

~~~~{.go}
type XdrMyPrint struct {
	Out io.Writer
}

func (xp *XdrMyPrint) Sprintf(f string, args ...interface{}) string {
	return fmt.Sprintf(f, args...)
}

func (xp *XdrMyPrint) Marshal(name string, i XdrType) {
	switch v := i.(type) {
	case *MySpecialStruct:
		fmt.Fprintf(xp.Out, "%s: %s\n", name, MySpecialString(v))
	case fmt.Stringer:
		fmt.Fprintf(xp.Out, "%s: %s\n", name, v.String())
	case XdrPtr:
		fmt.Fprintf(xp.Out, "%s._present: %v\n", name, v.GetPresent())
		v.XdrMarshalValue(xp, name)
	case XdrVec:
		fmt.Fprintf(xp.Out, "%s.len: %d\n", name, v.GetVecLen())
		v.XdrMarshalN(xp, name, v.GetVecLen())
	case XdrAggregate:
		v.XdrMarshal(xp, name)
	default:
		fmt.Fprintf(xp.Out, "%s: %v\n", name, i)
	}
}

func MyXdrToString(t XdrAggregate) string {
	out := &strings.Builder{}
	t.XdrMarshal(&XdrMyPrint{out}, "")
	return out.String()
}
~~~~

# SEE ALSO

rpcgen(1), xdrc(1)

<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4506>

# BUGS

goxdr ignores program and version declarations, and should instead
compile them to something that can be used to implement RFC5531 RPC
interfaces.

goxdr is not hygienic.  Because it capitalizes symbols, it could
produce a name clash if two symbols differ only in the capitalization
of the first letter.  Moreover, it introduces various helper types and
functions that begin `XDR_` or `Xdr`, so could produce incorrect code
if users employ such identifiers in XDR files.  Though RFC4506
disallows identifiers that start with underscore, goxdr accepts them
and produces code with inconsistent export semantics (since underscore
cannot be capitalized).

When unions use type bool as a discriminant, goxdr generates incorrect
code unless it knows that the discriminant is of type bool.  (This is
because go provides no uniform syntax for converting both enums and
bools to int32.)  goxdr tries to figure out when the union
discriminant is of type bool by following typedefs in the file, but
this doesn't work work if you use type aliases defined in a different
file.

IEEE 754 floating point allows for many different NaN (not a number)
values.  The marshaling code simply takes whatever binary value go has
sitting in memory, byteswapping on little-endian machines.  Other
languages and XDR implemenations may produce different NaN values from
the same code.  Hence, in the presence of floating point, the
marshaled output of seemingly deterministic code may vary across
implementations.
